# Firebase Functions

- [Firebase Functions](#firebase-functions)
  - [Nx-Firebase Functions](#nx-firebase-functions)
  - [Generating a new function](#generating-a-new-function)
  - [Building a Firebase function](#building-a-firebase-function)
  - [Firebase Function Dependencies \& Package Managers](#firebase-function-dependencies--package-managers)
  - [Deploying a Firebase function](#deploying-a-firebase-function)
  - [Testing \& Linting your firebase function](#testing--linting-your-firebase-function)
  - [Managing Functions in your Workspace](#managing-functions-in-your-workspace)
  - [Functions \& Nx-Firebase Applications](#functions--nx-firebase-applications)
    - [How Nx-Firebase function apps are linked to Nx-Firebase apps](#how-nx-firebase-function-apps-are-linked-to-nx-firebase-apps)
    - [Functions \& Firebase Config Codebases](#functions--firebase-config-codebases)
    - [Functions \& ESBuild](#functions--esbuild)
    - [Using ES Modules output](#using-es-modules-output)
    - [Using CommonJS output](#using-commonjs-output)
    - [Why ESBuild?](#why-esbuild)
    - [Why not minify?](#why-not-minify)
  - [Node Runtimes for Firebase Functions](#node-runtimes-for-firebase-functions)

## Nx-Firebase Functions

Nx-Firebase functions are generated as individual Nx application projects, separately to the Nx-Firebase application.

* This allows for multiple functions to be generated in a single workspace, each with their own `src/main.ts` entry point and `package.json` file.

* The default `src/main.ts` template is the same one generated by the Firebase CLI and defaults to using 2nd gen cloud functions. This file is of course just a starting point and can be modified as needed.

* Each function project is a buildable Typescript node-based application, which is compiled and bundled using [esbuild](#functions--esbuild).

* Each function project can export one or more firebase cloud functions.

* Each function project must be linked to a single [Firebase application project](./nx-firebase-applications.md) in the workspace, which ensures all functions can be managed by the nx-firebase plugin.

* Functions can import code from [Nx shared libraries](./nx-libraries.md) and `esbuild` will tree-shake and bundle the code into a single output file.

* You rename or move Firebase function projects in your Nx workspace, and use the plugin [sync](./nx-firebase-sync.md) command to keep your `firebase.json` configuration file in sync.

* Functions can be [tested](#testing--linting-your-firebase-function), [linted](#testing--linting-your-firebase-function), [built](#building-a-firebase-function) and [deployed](#deploying-a-firebase-function) using the Nx CLI

[package dependencies](#firebase-function-dependencies-package-managers)

* Functions support deployment with `npm`, `pnpm` or `yarn` package managers.


## Generating a new function

Generate a new Firebase function using:

- **`nx g @simondotm/nx-firebase:function`**

OR

- **`nx g @simondotm/nx-firebase:func`**

| Options                     | Type          | Description                                                |
| --------------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `name`                      | required      | the project name for your function                         |
| `--app=<app-project-name>`  | required      | the firebase app this function will be a dependency of     |
| `--directory=dir`           | optional      | the full path where this function will be located (e.g., `apps/my-function`) |
| `--format=<'cjs' or 'esm'>` | default 'esm' | specify if esbuild should generated commonJs or ES6 output |
| `--runTime=<node versions>` | optional      | the nodejs runtime you wish to use for this function - 18, 20, 22 |
| `--tags`                    | optional      | tags to set on the new project                         |
| `--setParserOptionsProject` | optional      | set the parserOptions.project in the tsconfig.json file |


## Building a Firebase function

To build your firebase function use this command:

- **`nx build your-firebase-function-project-name`**

This will use `esbuild` to compile & bundle the input function Typescript source code to:

- `dist/apps/your-firebase-function-project-name/main.js` - The bundled function code, in a single ESM format output file
- `dist/apps/your-firebase-function-project-name/package.json` - The ESM format package file for firebase CLI to process and deploy

## Firebase Function Dependencies & Package Managers

When building a function, Nx will automatically generate a `package.json` file in the output `dist` directory, which contains all package dependencies used by the function.

Nx will also generate a pruned `package-lock.json`, `yarn.lock` or `pnpm-lock.yaml` file in the function project root, depending on the package manager used in the workspace, which ensures your deployed function has exactly the same dependencies in the cloud as it does locally.

## Deploying a Firebase function

To deploy all of your firebase function projects use:

- **`nx deploy your-firebase-app-name --only:functions`**

To deploy one of your firebase function projects use this command:

- **`nx deploy your-firebase-function-name`**

To deploy a single function from within a firebase function project that exports multiple functions, use this command:

- **`nx deploy <codebase> --only functions:<codebase>:function-name`**

Where `<codebase>` is whatever name you gave your nx-firebase:function project.

> **IMPORTANT NOTE: Newly generated function projects do not deploy out-of-the-box. This is because the default Firebase CLI template for `main.ts` does not include code to call `initalizeApp()` so you will need to add this yourself:**

```
   import { initializeApp } from "firebase-admin/app";
   initializeApp()
```

## Testing & Linting your firebase function

- **`nx test your-firebase-function-name`**
- **`nx lint your-firebase-function-name`**

## Managing Functions in your Workspace

You can use the parent Firebase app to build, test, lint, watch and deploy all of your functions at once.

- **`nx build your-firebase-app-name`**
- **`nx test your-firebase-app-name`**
- **`nx lint your-firebase-app-name`**
- **`nx watch your-firebase-app-name`**
- **`nx deploy your-firebase-app-name`**

Note that there is no `serve` target for individual function projects, since serving only makes sense at a firebase app level with the Firebase Emulator suite, so use the following command instead:

- **`nx serve your-firebase-app-name`**

See [Firebase Application Targets](./nx-firebase-applications.md#nx-firebase-application-project-targets) for more details.

## Functions & Nx-Firebase Applications

### How Nx-Firebase function apps are linked to Nx-Firebase apps

The Nx-firebase plugin requires that Firebase function projects must always be a dependency of a single Firebase application project:

- This approach allows for multiple firebase projects in a single Nx workspace
- It ensures all functions can be [managed by the nx-firebase plugin](./nx-firebase-sync.md)
- Function application projects are added as `implicitDependencies` to the parent Firebase application, which ensures we can test, lint, build & deploy all functions from the top level Firebase application
- All functions share the same Firebase `--config` CLI option as the parent Firebase Application
- All functions share the same Firebase `--project` CLI option as the parent Firebase Application
- You can create as many Firebase function projects as you like
- Firebase function apps can export either just one or multiple firebase cloud functions
- When running the Firebase emulator using `serve`, **all** firebase function applications are built using `watch` mode, so local development is much more convenient

### Functions & Firebase Config Codebases

When new Firebase function applications are generated in the workspace:

- They are automatically added to the `functions[]` declaration in the project's `firebase.json` config file using the firebase CLI's `codebase` feature
- The `codebase` name assigned to the function in the config is the function applications project name.
- When using firebase `deploy`, the CLI will deploy all `codebase`'s declared in the firebase config file

### Functions & ESBuild

`esbuild` is configured in the function's `project.json` to only bundle 'internal' source local to the workspace:

- Import paths using TS aliases to `@nx/js` libraries will be resolved as internal imports.
- All external imports from `node_modules` will be added to the `package.json` as dependencies, since there is no good reason to bundle `node_modules` in node applications.

### Using ES Modules output

`esbuild` is also configured by default to always output bundled code as `esm` format modules:

- This ensures tree-shaking is activated in the bundling process
- Firebase functions with Node 16 or higher runtime all support ES modules
- The bundled output code in `dist` is _much_ cleaner to review
- We are only specifying that the _output_ bundle is `esm` format. The input source code sent to `esbuild` is Typescript code, which effectively uses ES6 module syntax anyway
- **Therefore, it is not necessary to change your workspace to use `esm` format modules to use this plugin since `esbuild` builds from Typescript _source code_, not compiled JS.**

### Using CommonJS output

If you still use Node `require()` in your Typescript function code, the default `esm` output setting for `esbuild` may not work. Your options are:

1. Refactor your code to use `import` instead of `require`
2. Modify the function `project.json` to set esbuild `format` to `['cjs']`
3. Generate your function applications with the `--format=cjs` option

Note that using `cjs` output may prevent tree-shaking optimizations.


### Why ESBuild?

While Webpack and Rollup are viable options for bundling node applications:

- `esbuild` is designed for node,
- it is _very_ fast
- it optimizes the output using tree-shaking, which is great for fast cold starts
- and it works very simply out of the box with Nx without any need for additional configuration files.

If you want to try Webpack or Rollup, just change your `build` target in the function's `project.json` accordingly.

> The Nx Webpack bundler may be required for projects that require Typescript decorators such as NextJS.

### Why not minify?

This plugin does not set or recommend the minify option for esbuild.

- It is not really necessary for cloud function node runtime environments
- Obfuscation of the code is not necessary since it executes in a private server-side environment
- There is minimal (if any) performance benefit to be had
- If exceptions occur in the cloud run, stack traces will be readable if code is not minified

## Node Runtimes for Firebase Functions

Firebase Functions are deployed by the Firebase CLI to specific Nodejs runtime environments.

The required runtime is automatically set by the nx-firebase plugin function generator, but can be manually changedt in the `firebase.json` configuration as a definition (eg. `nodejs16`, `nodejs18` etc.):

```
  "functions": [
    {
      "codebase": "firebase-project1",
      "runtime": "nodejs16",
      ...

    }
  ],
```

Runtimes are recommended to be set to the same value for all functions in a project.
